_your zenodo badge here_

# niazi-etal_2022_pnas

**Peak Nonrenewable Water: Groundwater Depletion Rates Peak Globally over the 21st Century**

Hassan Niazi<sup>1\*</sup>, Thomas Wild<sup>1</sup>, Neal Graham<sup>1</sup>, Mohamad Hejazi<sup>2</sup>, Sean Turner<sup>3</sup>, Siwa Msangi<sup>1</sup>, Sonny Kim<sup>1</sup>, Jonathan Lamontagne<sup>4</sup>, Mengqi Zhao<sup>3</sup>, and Cathrine Yonkofski<sup>3</sup>

<sup>1 </sup> Joint Global Change Research Institute, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (JGCRI-PNNL), College Park, MD, USA
<sup>2 </sup> King Abdullah Petroleum Studies and Research Center (KAPSARC), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
<sup>3 </sup> Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), Richland, WA, USA
<sup>4 </sup> Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA

\* corresponding author:  hassan.niazi@pnnl.gov

## Abstract
Vast stores of groundwater accumulated below the Earth's surface during the Holocene Epoch (i.e., past 12,000 years). Over the past 50 years, these non-renewable stocks have been depleted at alarming rates, largely to fuel the irrigated green revolution of global agro-economic development. Given society's reliance on groundwater, we build on the concept of 'peak water limits' to explore whether, when, and where humanity might reach peak groundwater usage. Using an integrated model of the coupled human-earth system with global coverage, we simulate groundwater depletion across 235 water basins under 900 plausible scenarios covering a wide range of human and earth system dimensions of global change over the 21st century. Global nonrenewable groundwater extraction demonstrates a distinct peak-and-decline signature across nearly all (98\%) scenarios, peaking on average at 625 km$^3$yr$^{-1}$ in 2050, followed by a consistent decline through 2100. This global pattern is driven by about one-third of global water basins (33±9\%), which robustly exhibit this characteristic peak-and-decline signature across most scenarios. A peak-and-decline signature characterizes most depletable natural resources, such as oil, gold and copper, and suggests the need for a paradigm shift wherein groundwater is carefully valued and managed as a depletable, rather than renewable, resource. Eventually, groundwater pumping as a long-term strategy for mitigating water scarcity is likely to diminish toward the end of the century. And water basins which are now heavily dependent on groundwater resources for meeting their demands will likely face increasing costs of groundwater and food production.

## Journal reference
To be updated later

## Code reference
References for each minted software release for all code involved.  

These are generated by Zenodo automatically when conducting a release when Zenodo has been linked to your GitHub repository. The Zenodo references are built by setting the author order in order of contribution to the code using the author's GitHub user name.  This citation can, and likely should, be edited without altering the DOI.

If you have modified a codebase that is outside of a formal release, and the modifications are not planned on being merged back into a version, fork the parent repository and add a `.<shortname>` to the version number of the parent and construct your own name.  For example, `v1.2.5.hydro`.

Human, I.M. (2021, April 14). Project/repo:v0.1.0 (Version v0.1.0). Zenodo. http://doi.org/some-doi-number/zenodo.7777777

## Data reference

### Input data
Reference for each minted data source for your input data.  For example:

Human, I.M. (2021). My input dataset name [Data set]. DataHub. https://doi.org/some-doi-number

### Output data
Reference for each minted data source for your output data.  For example:

Human, I.M. (2021). My output dataset name [Data set]. DataHub. https://doi.org/some-doi-number

## Contributing modeling software
| Model | Version | Repository Link | DOI |
|-------|---------|-----------------|-----|
| model 1 | version | link to code repository | link to DOI dataset |
| model 2 | version | link to code repository | link to DOI dataset |
| component 1 | version | link to code repository | link to DOI dataset |

## Reproduce my experiment
Fill in detailed info here or link to other documentation that is a thorough walkthrough of how to use what is in this repository to reproduce your experiment.

### Reproduce analysis 


### Reproduce figures (core versions)



1. Install the software components required to conduct the experiement from [Contributing modeling software](#contributing-modeling-software)
2. Download and install the supporting input data required to conduct the experiement from [Input data](#input-data)
3. Run the following scripts in the `workflow` directory to re-create this experiment:

| Script Name | Description | How to Run |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `step_one.py` | Script to run the first part of my experiment | `python3 step_one.py -f /path/to/inputdata/file_one.csv` |
| `step_two.py` | Script to run the last part of my experiment | `python3 step_two.py -o /path/to/my/outputdir` |

4. Download and unzip the output data from my experiment [Output data](#output-data)
5. Run the following scripts in the `workflow` directory to compare my outputs to those from the publication

| Script Name | Description | How to Run |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `compare.py` | Script to compare my outputs to the original | `python3 compare.py --orig /path/to/original/data.csv --new /path/to/new/data.csv` |

## Reproduce my figures
Use the scripts found in the `figures` directory to reproduce the figures used in this publication.

| Script Name | Description | How to Run |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `generate_figures.py` | Script to generate my figures | `python3 generate_figures.py -i /path/to/inputs -o /path/to/outuptdir` |
